---
title: "Stylized faces enhance ERP features used for the detection of emotional responses"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2023-toon
excerpt: 'It is found that artificially enhanced human faces with exaggerated, cartoonish visual features significantly improve some commonly used neural correlates of emotion as measured by event-related potentials (ERPs).'
date: 2023-04-27
venue: 'Frontiers in Human Neuroscience'
slidesurl: ''
paperurl: 'https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/human-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2023.1160800/full'
citation: 'Barradas-Chacón, L. A., Brunner, C., & Wriessnegger, S. C. (2023). Stylized faces enhance ERP features used for the detection of emotional responses. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 17, 1160800.'
---

For their ease of accessibility and low cost, current Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCI) used to detect subjective emotional and affective states rely largely on electroencephalographic (EEG) signals. Public datasets are available for researchers to design models for affect detection from EEG. However, few designs focus on optimally exploiting the nature of the stimulus elicitation to improve accuracy. The RSVP protocol is used in this experiment to present human faces of emotion to 28 participants while EEG was measured. We found that artificially enhanced human faces with exaggerated, cartoonish visual features significantly improve some commonly used neural correlates of emotion as measured by event-related potentials (ERPs). These images elicit an enhanced N170 component, well known to relate to the facial visual encoding process. Our findings suggest that the study of emotion elicitation could exploit consistent, high detail, AI generated stimuli transformations to study the characteristics of electrical brain activity related to visual affective stimuli. Furthermore, this specific result might be useful in the context of affective BCI design, where a higher accuracy in affect decoding from EEG can improve the experience of a user.